\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename org-node.info
@settitle org-node
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Org-node: (org-node). Link org-id entries into a network.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title org-node
@author Martin Edström
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top org-node
@end ifnottex

@menu
<<<<<<< HEAD
* News for v3::
=======
* Background::
* Setup::
* Backlinks::
* Misc::
* Appendix::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Background

* What's all this::
* What's a "node"?::
* Features::

Setup

* Install::
* Quick start::

Install

* An update broke things?::

Backlinks

* Backlink solution 1 displayed in a separate window::
* Backlink solution 2 Print inside the file::

Backlink solution 1: displayed in a separate window

* Option 1A Reuse the org-roam buffer::
* Option 2A Use the new org-node-context buffer::

Backlink solution 2: Print inside the file

* Option 2A Automatic @samp{BACKLINKS} property::
* Option 2B Automatic @samp{BACKLINKS...END} drawer: Option 2B Automatic @samp{BACKLINKSEND} drawer. 
* Option 2C Semi-automatic @samp{BACKLINKS...END} drawer: Option 2C Semi-automatic @samp{BACKLINKSEND} drawer. 

Misc

* Manage org-id-locations::
* Exclude uninteresting nodes::
* Org-capture::
* Completion-at-point::
* FAQ Any analogue to @samp{org-roam-node-display-template}?::
* Grep::
* Let org-open-at-point detect refs::
* Limitation TRAMP::
* Limitation Encryption::
* Limitation Unique titles::
* Limitation Org-ref::
* Toolbox::
* Experimental Node sequences::

Manage org-id-locations

* Undoing an org-roam hack::

Exclude uninteresting nodes

* Limitation @samp{ROAM_EXCLUDE}::

Experimental: Node sequences

* What are node seqs?::

Appendix

* Appendix I Rosetta stone::
* Appendix II How to rollback::
* Appendix III Random tips::

@end detailmenu
>>>>>>> 511e0c5 (docs:)
@end menu

@node News for v3
@chapter News for v3 :export:

A lot of code has been spun into a new library @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/indexed}@comma{} now a dependency.  Reduces codebase by 25%.  This may allow other projects to create interesting stuff without org-node.

Update initfiles when you can.  Direct renames:

<<<<<<< HEAD
@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Old user option
@tab New user option
@item org-node-extra-id-dirs
@tab indexed-org-dirs
@item org-node-extra-id-dirs-exclude
@tab indexed-org-dirs-exclude
@item org-node-link-types
@tab indexed-seek-link-types
@end multitable

Also you'll get messages about it@comma{} but enable two modes before @samp{org-node-cache-mode}:

@lisp
(indexed-roam-mode)
(indexed-updater-mode)
(org-node-cache-mode)
@end lisp

Node seqs@comma{} if you use them@comma{} now require turning on explicitly.

@lisp
(org-node-seq-mode)
@end lisp

For reference@comma{} check out the full list of obsoletions near the bottom of file @samp{org-node-changes.el}.
=======
I like @uref{https://github.com/org-roam/org-roam, org-roam} but found it too slow@comma{} so I made @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/quickroam, quickroam}.  And that idea spun off into this package@comma{} a standalone thing.  It may also be easier to pick up than org-roam.

@itemize
@item
@strong{If you were using org-roam}@comma{} there is nothing to migrate.  You can use both packages.  It's the same on-disk format: "notes" are identified by their org-id.

With optional shims@comma{} you can even @strong{skip syncing the org-roam DB} and continue using its rich backlinks buffer!

In pursuit of being "just org-id"@comma{} this package has no equivalent setting to @samp{org-roam-directory} -- it just looks up the @samp{org-id-locations} table.

@item
@strong{If you were not using org-roam}@comma{} maybe think of it as somewhat like @uref{https://github.com/alphapapa/org-recent-headings, org-recent-headings} tooled-up to the extent that you won't need other methods of browsing@comma{} as long as you give IDs to all objects of interest.

If you were the sort of person to prefer ID-links over file links or any other type of link@comma{} you're in the right place!  Now you can rely on IDs@comma{} and---if you want---stop worrying about filenames@comma{} directories and subtree hierarchies.  As long as you've assigned an ID to a heading or file@comma{} you can find it later.
@end itemize

@node What's a "node"?
@section What's a "node"?

My life can be divided into two periods "@strong{before org-roam}" and "@strong{after org-roam}".  I crossed a kind of gap once I got a good way to link between my notes.  It's odd to remember when I just relied on browsing subtrees and filesystem directories -- what a strange way to work!

I used to lose track of things I had written@comma{} under some forgotten heading in a forgotten file in a forgotten directory.  The org-roam method let me @strong{find and build on} my own work@comma{} instead of @uref{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptomnesia, recreating it all the time}.

At the core@comma{} all the "notetaking packages" (@uref{https://github.com/rtrppl/orgrr, orgrr}/@uref{https://github.com/localauthor/zk, zk}/@uref{https://github.com/EFLS/zetteldeft, zetteldeft}/@uref{https://github.com/org-roam/org-roam, org-roam}/@uref{https://github.com/protesilaos/denote, denote}/@uref{https://github.com/kaorahi/howm, howm}/@uref{https://github.com/kisaragi-hiu/minaduki, minaduki}/@dots{}) try to help you with this: make it easy to link between notes and explore them.

Right off the bat@comma{} that imposes two requirements: a method to search for notes@comma{} since you can't link to something you can't search for@comma{} and a design-choice about what kinds of things should turn up as search hits.  What's a "note"?

Just searching for Org files is too coarse.  Just searching for any subtree anywhere brings in too much clutter.

@strong{Here's what org-roam invented.}  It turns out that if you limit the search-hits to just those files and subtrees you've deigned to assign an org-id -- which roughly maps to @emph{everything you've ever thought it was worth linking to} -- it filters out the noise excellently.

Once a subtree has an ID you can link to@comma{} it's a "node" because it has joined the wider graph@comma{} the network of linked nodes.  I wish the English language had more distinct sounds for the words "node" and "note"@comma{} but to clarify@comma{} I'll say "ID-node" when the distinction matters.

@node Features
@section Features

A comparison of three systems that all permit relying on org-id and don't lock you into the concept of "one-note-per-file".

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Feature
@tab org-roam
@tab org-node
@tab @uref{https://github.com/toshism/org-super-links, org-super-links}
@item Backlinks
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab yes
@item Node search and insert
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab -- (suggests @uref{https://github.com/alphapapa/org-ql, org-ql})
@item Node aliases
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Node exclusion
@tab yes
@tab limited
@tab not applicable
@item Refile
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Rich backlinks buffer
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Customize how backlinks shown
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab yes
@item Reflinks
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Ref search
@tab yes
@tab yes (as aliases)
@tab not applicable
@item Org 9.5 @@citations as refs
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab not applicable
@item Support org-ref v3
@tab yes
@tab limited
@tab not applicable
@item Support org-ref v2
@tab yes
@tab --
@tab not applicable
@item Work thru org-roam-capture
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab ?
@item Work thru org-capture
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab ?
@item Daily-nodes
@tab yes
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Node sequences
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Show backlinks in same window
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab yes
@item Cooperate with org-super-links
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab not applicable
@item Fix link descriptions
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab --
@item List dead links
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Rename file when title changes
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Warn about duplicate titles
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab --
@item Principled "related-section"
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab yes
@item Untitled notes
@tab --
@tab --
@tab --
@item org-protocol extension
@tab yes
@tab --
@tab --
@item Support @samp{roam:} links
@tab yes
@tab -- (wontfix)
@tab --
@item Can have separate note piles
@tab yes
@tab -- (wontfix)
@tab not applicable
@item Some query-able cache
@tab EmacSQL
@tab hash tables
@tab --
@item Async cache rebuild
@tab --
@tab yes
@tab not applicable
@item @strong{Time to cache my 3000 nodes}
@tab @strong{2m 48s}
@tab @strong{0m 01s}
@tab not applicable
@item @strong{Time to save file w/ 400 nodes}
@tab @strong{5--10s}
@tab @strong{instant}
@tab ?
@item @strong{Time to open minibuffer}
@tab @strong{1--3s}
@tab @strong{instant}
@tab not applicable
@end multitable

@node Setup
@chapter Setup

@menu
* Install::
* Quick start::
@end menu

@node Install
@section Install

Assuming your package manager knows about @uref{https://melpa.org/#/getting-started, MELPA}@comma{} add this initfile snippet:

@lisp
(use-package org-node
  :config
  (setq indexed-sync-with-org-id t)
  (indexed-updater-mode)
  (indexed-roam-mode) ;; Support ROAM_REFS
  (org-node-cache-mode))
@end lisp

If you're @strong{coming here from org-roam}@comma{} try this instead:

@lisp
(use-package org-node
  :init
  ;; Use org-roam's style of file names
  (setq org-node-slug-fn #'org-node-slugify-like-roam-default)
  (setq org-node-datestamp-format "%Y%m%d%H%M%S-")
  ;; Use org-roam-capture
  (setq org-node-creation-fn #'org-node-new-via-roam-capture)
  ;; For org-roam users who find saving slow with
  ;; `org-roam-db-autosync-mode'@comma{}
  ;; take over that part of its job and write to its DB
  (setq indexed-roam-overwrite t)
  (setq org-roam-db-update-on-save nil)
  ;; Faster save if you don't use "roam:" links
  (setq org-roam-link-auto-replace nil)

  :config
  (setq indexed-sync-with-org-id t)
  (indexed-updater-mode)
  (indexed-roam-mode) ;; Support ROAM_REFS
  (org-node-cache-mode))

;; Speed up the org-roam buffer
;; NOTE: You can use org-node's context buffers instead
;; NOTE: Subject to removal@comma{} if upstream finally patches this
(use-package org-node-fakeroam
  :after org-roam
  :config
  (org-node-fakeroam-fast-render-mode))
@end lisp

@menu
* An update broke things?::
@end menu

@node An update broke things?
@subsection An update broke things?

See @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node#appendix-ii-how-to-rollback, How to rollback} at the end of this readme.

@node Quick start
@section Quick start

If you're new to these concepts@comma{} fear not.  The main things for day-to-day operation are two verbs: "find" and "insert".

Pick some short keys and try them out.

@lisp
(keymap-set global-map "M-s M-f" #'org-node-find)
(keymap-set org-mode-map "M-s M-i" #'org-node-insert-link)
@end lisp

To browse config options@comma{} type @samp{M-x customize-group RET org-node}.

Final tip: there's @strong{no separate command} for creating a new node!  Reuse one of the commands above@comma{} and type the name of a node that doesn't exist.

Try it and see what happens!

@node Backlinks
@chapter Backlinks

Backlinks are the butter on the bread that is your notes.  If you've ever seen a "What links here" section on some webpage@comma{} that's exactly what it is.  Imagine seeing that@comma{} all the time.  The following sections outline two general ways to do so.

@menu
* Backlink solution 1 displayed in a separate window::
* Backlink solution 2 Print inside the file::
@end menu

@node Backlink solution 1 displayed in a separate window
@section Backlink solution 1: displayed in a separate window

@menu
* Option 1A Reuse the org-roam buffer::
* Option 2A Use the new org-node-context buffer::
@end menu

@node Option 1A Reuse the org-roam buffer
@subsection Option 1A: Reuse the org-roam buffer

Believe it or not@comma{} it Just Works.  So long as you install @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node-fakeroam, org-node-fakeroam} -- which pulls in org-roam with it -- and add to initfiles:

@lisp
(org-node-fakeroam-redisplay-mode) ;; optional behavior
(org-node-fakeroam-jit-backlinks-mode) ;; shim so no SQLite needed
(org-node-fakeroam-fast-render-mode) ;; perf fixes

;; Example keybindings
(keymap-set org-mode-map "M-s M-t M-t" #'org-roam-buffer-toggle)
(keymap-set org-mode-map "M-s M-t M-d" #'org-roam-buffer-display-dedicated)
;; if your window mgmt style is constantly lose all windows
(keymap-set global-map "M-s M-r" #'org-node-fakeroam-show-buffer)
@end lisp

@node Option 2A Use the new org-node-context buffer
@subsection Option 2A: Use the new org-node-context buffer

Org-node ships a complete rewrite of the org-roam buffer.

Add to initfiles:

@lisp
(org-node-context-follow-mode) ;; optional behavior

;; Example keybindings
(keymap-set org-mode-map "M-s M-t" #'org-node-context-toggle)
;; if your window mgmt style is constantly lose all windows
(keymap-set global-map "M-s M-r" #'org-node-context-raise)
@end lisp

@node Backlink solution 2 Print inside the file
@section Backlink solution 2: Print inside the file

I rarely have the screen space to display a backlink buffer.  Because it needs my active involvement to keep visible@comma{} I go long periods seeing no backlinks.

A complementary solution@comma{} which can also stand alone@comma{} is to have the backlinks @emph{written into} the file@comma{} on an Org property line or in a drawer.

@menu
* Option 2A Automatic @samp{BACKLINKS} property::
* Option 2B Automatic @samp{BACKLINKS...END} drawer: Option 2B Automatic @samp{BACKLINKSEND} drawer. 
* Option 2C Semi-automatic @samp{BACKLINKS...END} drawer: Option 2C Semi-automatic @samp{BACKLINKSEND} drawer. 
@end menu

@node Option 2A Automatic @samp{BACKLINKS} property
@subsection Option 2A: Automatic @samp{:BACKLINKS:} property

Add to initfiles:

@lisp
(setq org-node-backlink-do-drawers nil)
(org-node-backlink-mode)
@end lisp

For a first-time run@comma{} type @samp{M-x org-node-backlink-mass-update-props}.  (Don't worry if you change your mind; undo with @samp{M-x org-node-backlink-mass-delete-props}.)

NOTE 1: To be clear@comma{} this mode never generates new IDs.  That's your own business.  This only adds/edits @samp{:BACKLINKS:} properties.

That also means that @strong{not all links create a backlink@comma{}} only links located in an entry that has an ID@.  After all@comma{} there must be something to link back to.

NOTE 2:  People who prefer to hard-wrap text@comma{} instead of enabling @samp{visual-line-mode} or similar@comma{} may prefer Option 2B@.

@node Option 2B Automatic @samp{BACKLINKSEND} drawer
@subsection Option 2B: Automatic @samp{:BACKLINKS:...:END:} drawer

Same as Option 2A@comma{} but uses a multiline drawer.

For a first-time run@comma{} type @samp{M-x org-node-backlink-mass-update-drawers}.  (Don't worry if you change your mind; undo with @samp{M-x org-node-mass-delete-drawers}.)

Then add to initfiles:

@lisp
(org-node-backlink-mode)
@end lisp

@node Option 2C Semi-automatic @samp{BACKLINKSEND} drawer
@subsection Option 2C: Semi-automatic @samp{:BACKLINKS:...:END:} drawer

If you were previously using @uref{https://github.com/toshism/org-super-links, org-super-links}@comma{} you can continue letting it manage its drawers@comma{} and leave org-node out of the matter.

Just add to initfiles:

@lisp
(add-hook 'org-node-insert-link-hook
          #'org-super-links-convert-link-to-super)
@end lisp

Org-node still gives you some bonus tools:

@itemize
@item
1. You can list any dead forward-links to fix them manually:

@samp{M-x org-node-list-dead-links}

@item
2. You can add all missing backlinks in bulk:

@samp{M-x org-node-backlink-mass-update-drawers}
@end itemize

The second command may be useful as a starting point if you're new to org-super-links@comma{} pre-populating the notes you already have.

However@comma{} when you have pre-existing drawers@dots{} @strong{MAKE A FULL BACKUP} before trying it!

Org-node has a different usage in mind than org-super-links.  You may be accustomed to having old manually formatted and sorted drawers.

Running aforementioned command @strong{may re-sort your backlinks and re-format their appearance into something you don't want}; double-check the following options:

@itemize
@item
@samp{org-node-backlink-drawer-sorter}
@item
@samp{org-node-backlink-drawer-formatter}
@end itemize

Finally@comma{} lines without a proper Org link like @samp{[[id:foo][bar]]} are @strong{deleted}@comma{} which would mean @strong{destroying any timestamp within.}

@node Misc
@chapter Misc

@menu
* Manage org-id-locations::
* Exclude uninteresting nodes::
* Org-capture::
* Completion-at-point::
* FAQ Any analogue to @samp{org-roam-node-display-template}?::
* Grep::
* Let org-open-at-point detect refs::
* Limitation TRAMP::
* Limitation Encryption::
* Limitation Unique titles::
* Limitation Org-ref::
* Toolbox::
* Experimental Node sequences::
@end menu

@node Manage org-id-locations
@section Manage org-id-locations

Ever run into "ID not found" situations?  Org-node gives you an extra way to feed data to org-id@comma{} as @uref{http://edstrom.dev/wjwrl/taking-ownership-of-org-id, I find clumsy the built-in options}.

Example setting:

@lisp
(setq indexed-org-dirs
      '("~/org/"
        "~/Syncthing/"
        "/mnt/stuff/"))
@end lisp

Do a @samp{M-x org-node-reset} and see if it can find your notes now.

@menu
* Undoing an org-roam hack::
@end menu

@node Undoing an org-roam hack
@subsection Undoing an org-roam hack

If you have org-roam loaded@comma{} but no longer update the DB@comma{} opening a link can sometimes send you to an outdated file path due to @uref{https://github.com/org-roam/org-roam/blob/2a630476b3d49d7106f582e7f62b515c62430714/org-roam-id.el#L91, a line in org-roam-id.el} that causes org-id to @emph{preferentially} look up the org-roam DB instead of org-id's own table!

Either revert that with the following snippet@comma{} or if the extension @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node-fakeroam, org-node-fakeroam} covers your needs@comma{} simply delete the DB (normally located at "~/.emacs.d/org-roam.db").

@lisp
;; Undo an org-roam override
(with-eval-after-load 'org-roam-id
  (org-link-set-parameters
   ;; This was default value at least from Org 9.1 to 9.7+
   "id" :follow #'org-id-open :store #'org-id-store-link-maybe))
@end lisp

@node Exclude uninteresting nodes
@section Exclude uninteresting nodes

One user had over a thousand project-nodes@comma{} but only just began to do a knowledge base@comma{} and wished to avoid seeing the project nodes.

This could work by---for example---excluding anything tagged "project" or perhaps anything that has a TODO state.  This excludes both:

@lisp
(setq org-node-filter-fn
      (lambda (node)
        (not
         (or (indexed-todo-state node)
             (member "project" (indexed-tags node))
             (indexed-property "ROAM_EXCLUDE" node)))))
@end lisp

Or you could go with a whitelist approach@comma{} to show only nodes from a certain directory we'll call "my-personal-wiki":

@lisp
(setq org-node-filter-fn
      (lambda (node)
        (and (string-search "/my-personal-wiki/" (indexed-file-name node))
             (not (indexed-property "ROAM_EXCLUDE" node)))))
@end lisp

(NB: if you don't know what @samp{ROAM_EXCLUDE} is@comma{} feel free to omit that clause)

@menu
* Limitation @samp{ROAM_EXCLUDE}::
@end menu

@node Limitation @samp{ROAM_EXCLUDE}
@subsection Limitation: @samp{ROAM_EXCLUDE}

Let's say you have a big archive file@comma{} fulla IDs@comma{} and you want all the nodes within out of sight.

Putting a @samp{:ROAM_EXCLUDE: t} at the top won't do it@comma{} because unlike in org-roam@comma{} @strong{child ID nodes of an excluded node are not excluded!}  The @samp{org-node-filter-fn} applies its ruleset to each node in isolation.

However@comma{} nodes in isolation do still have inherited tags.  So you can exploit that@comma{} or the outline path or file name.

It works well for me to filter out any file or directory that happens to contain "archive" in the name:

@lisp
(setq org-node-filter-fn
      (lambda (node)
        (not (string-search "archive" (indexed-file-name node)))))
@end lisp

Or put something like @samp{#+filetags: :hide_node:} at the top of each file@comma{} and set:

@lisp
(setq org-node-filter-fn
      (lambda (node)
        (not (member "hide_node" (indexed-tags node)))))
@end lisp

@node Org-capture
@section Org-capture

You may have heard that org-roam has a set of meta-capture templates: the @samp{org-roam-capture-templates}.

People who understand the magic of capture templates@comma{} they may take this in stride.  Me@comma{} I never felt confident using a second-order abstraction over an already leaky abstraction.

Can we just use vanilla org-capture?  That'd be less scary.  The answer is yes!

The secret sauce is @samp{(function org-node-capture-target)}:

@lisp
(setq org-capture-templates
      '(("i" "Capture into ID node"
         plain (function org-node-capture-target) nil
         :empty-lines-after 1)

        ("j" "Jump to ID node"
         plain (function org-node-capture-target) nil
         :jump-to-captured t
         :immediate-finish t)

        ;; Sometimes handy after `org-node-insert-link'@comma{} to
        ;; make a stub you plan to fill in later@comma{} without
        ;; leaving the current buffer for now
        ("s" "Make quick stub ID node"
         plain (function org-node-capture-target) nil
         :immediate-finish t)))
@end lisp

With that done@comma{} you can optionally configure the everyday commands @samp{org-node-find} & @samp{org-node-insert-link} to outsource to org-capture when they try to create new nodes:

@lisp
(setq org-node-creation-fn #'org-capture)
@end lisp

That last optional functionality may be confusing if I describe it -- better you give it a spin and see if you like.

@node Completion-at-point
@section Completion-at-point

To complete words at point into known node titles:

@lisp
(org-node-complete-at-point-mode)
(setq org-roam-completion-everywhere nil) ;; Prevent org-roam's
@end lisp

@node FAQ Any analogue to @samp{org-roam-node-display-template}?
@section FAQ: Any analogue to @samp{org-roam-node-display-template}?

To customize how the nodes look in the minibuffer@comma{} configure @samp{org-node-affixation-fn}:

@example
M-x customize-variable RET org-node-affixation-fn
@end example


A related option is @samp{org-node-alter-candidates}@comma{} which lets you match against the annotations as well as the title:

@lisp
(setq org-node-alter-candidates t)
@end lisp

@node Grep
@section Grep

If you have Ripgrep installed on the computer@comma{} and @uref{https://github.com/minad/consult, Consult} installed on Emacs@comma{} you can use this command to grep across all your Org files at any time.

@lisp
(keymap-set global-map "M-s M-g" #'org-node-grep)
@end lisp

This can be a power-tool for mass edits.  Say you want to rename some Org tag @samp{:math:} to @samp{:Math:} absolutely everywhere.  Then you could follow a procedure such as:

@enumerate
@item
Use @samp{org-node-grep} and type @samp{:math:}
@item
Use @samp{embark-export} (from package @uref{https://github.com/oantolin/embark, Embark})
@item
Use @samp{wgrep-change-to-wgrep-mode} (from package @uref{https://github.com/mhayashi1120/Emacs-wgrep, wgrep})
@item
Do a query-replace (@code{M-%}) to replace all @samp{:math:} with @samp{:Math:}
@item
Type @code{C-c C-c} to apply the changes
@end enumerate

@node Let org-open-at-point detect refs
@section Let org-open-at-point detect refs

(For background@comma{} consult the docstring of @samp{org-node-link-types}.)

Say there's a link to a web URL@comma{} and you've forgotten you also have a node listing that exact URL in its @samp{ROAM_REFS} property.

Wouldn't it be nice if@comma{} clicking on that link@comma{} you automatically visit that node first instead of being sent to the web?  Here you go:

@lisp
(add-hook 'org-open-at-point-functions
          #'org-node-try-visit-ref-node)
@end lisp

@node Limitation TRAMP
@section Limitation: TRAMP

Working with files over TRAMP is unsupported for now.  Org-node tries to be very fast@comma{} often nulling @samp{file-name-handler-alist}@comma{} which TRAMP needs.

The best way to change this is to @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node/issues, file an issue} to show you care :-)

@node Limitation Encryption
@section Limitation: Encryption

Encrypted nodes probably won't be found.  As with TRAMP@comma{} file an issue.

@node Limitation Unique titles
@section Limitation: Unique titles

If two ID-nodes exist with the same title@comma{} one of them disappears from minibuffer completions.

That's just the nature of completion.  Much can be said for embracing the uniqueness constraint@comma{} and org-node will print messages about collisions.

Anyway@dots{} there's a workaround.  Assuming you leave @samp{org-node-affixation-fn} at its default setting@comma{} adding this to initfiles tends to do the trick:

@lisp
(setq org-node-alter-candidates t)
@end lisp

This lets you match against the node outline path and not only the title@comma{} which resolves most conflicts given that the most likely source of conflict is subheadings in disparate files@comma{} that happen to be named the same.  @uref{https://fosstodon.org/@@nickanderson/112249581810196258, Some people} make this trick part of their workflow.

NB: for users of @samp{org-node-complete-at-point-mode}@comma{} this workaround won't help those completions.  With some luck you'll rarely insert the wrong link@comma{} but it's worth being aware. (@uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node/issues/62, #62})

@node Limitation Org-ref
@section Limitation: Org-ref

Org-node supports the Org 9.5 @@citations@comma{} but not fully the aftermarket @uref{https://github.com/jkitchin/org-ref, org-ref} &citations that emulate @LaTeX{} look-and-feel@comma{} because it would double the time taken by @samp{M-x org-node-reset}.

What works is bracketed Org-ref v3 citations that start with "cite"@comma{} e.g. @samp{[[citep:...]]}@comma{} @samp{[[citealt:...]]}@comma{} @samp{[[citeauthor:...]]}@comma{} since indexed-org-parser.el is able to pick them up for free.

What doesn't work is e.g. @samp{[[bibentry:...]]} since it doesn't start with "cite"@comma{} nor plain @samp{citep:...} since it is not wrapped in brackets.

If you need more of Org-ref@comma{} you have at least two options:

@itemize
@item
Use org-roam - see discussions on boosting its performance @uref{https://org-roam.discourse.group/t/rewriting-org-roam-node-list-for-speed-it-is-not-sqlite/3475/92, here} and @uref{https://org-roam.discourse.group/t/improving-performance-of-node-find-et-al/3326/33, here}

@item
Get your elbows dirty and try to revive the archived branch @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node/branches, "orgref"}@comma{} see @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node/commit/90b0e503ac75428a5d3ca6a4c8c51b5e075064d3, relevant commit}.
@end itemize

@node Toolbox
@section Toolbox

Basic commands:

@itemize
@item
@samp{org-node-find}
@item
@samp{org-node-insert-link}
@item
@samp{org-node-insert-transclusion}
@item
@samp{org-node-insert-transclusion-as-subtree}
@item
@samp{org-node-visit-random}
@item
@samp{org-node-refile}
@item
@samp{org-node-context-raise}
@item
@samp{org-node-context-toggle}
@item
@samp{org-node-seq-dispatch}
@itemize
@item
Browse node series -- see README
@end itemize
@item
@samp{org-node-extract-subtree}
@itemize
@item
A bizarro counterpart to @samp{org-roam-extract-subtree}.  Export the subtree at point into a file-level node@comma{} @strong{leave a link in the outline parent of where the subtree was}@comma{} and show the new file as current buffer.
@end itemize
@item
@samp{org-node-nodeify-entry}
@itemize
@item
(Trivial) Give an ID to the subtree at point@comma{} and run the hook @samp{org-node-creation-hook}
@end itemize
@item
@samp{org-node-insert-heading}
@itemize
@item
(Trivial) Shortcut for @samp{org-insert-heading} + @samp{org-node-nodeify-entry}
@end itemize
@item
@samp{org-node-grep}
@itemize
@item
(Requires @uref{https://github.com/minad/consult, consult}) Grep across all known Org files.
@end itemize
@end itemize

Rarer commands:

@itemize
@item
@samp{org-node-rewrite-links-ask}
@itemize
@item
Look for link descriptions that got out of sync with the corresponding node title@comma{} then prompt at each link to update it
@end itemize

@item
@samp{org-node-rename-file-by-title}
@itemize
@item
Auto-rename the file based on the current @samp{#+title} or first heading
@itemize
@item
Can be run manually or placed on @samp{after-save-hook}!  When run as a hook@comma{} it is conservative@comma{} doing nothing until you configure @samp{org-node-renames-allowed-dirs}.
@item
@strong{Please note} that if your filenames have datestamp prefixes@comma{} like org-roam's default behavior of making filenames such as @samp{20240831143302-node_title.org}@comma{} it is important to get @samp{org-node-datestamp-format} right or it @strong{may clobber a pre-existing datestamp}.

A message is printed about the rename@comma{} but it's easy to miss.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@item
@samp{org-node-list-dead-links}
@itemize
@item
List links where the destination ID could not be found
@end itemize

@item
@samp{org-node-lint-all-files}
@itemize
@item
Can help you fix a broken setup: it runs org-lint on all known files and generates a report of Org syntax problems@comma{} for you to correct manually.

Org-node @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node/issues/8#issuecomment-2101316447, assumes all files have valid syntax}@comma{} but many of the reported problems are survivable.
@end itemize

@item
@samp{org-node-list-reflinks}
@itemize
@item
List all links that aren't @samp{id:} links.  Also includes citations@comma{} even though they are technically not links.
@end itemize

@item
@samp{org-node-list-feedback-arcs}
@itemize
@item
(Requires GNU R@comma{} with R packages stringr@comma{} readr and igraph)

Explore @uref{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feedback_arc_set, feedback arcs} in your ID link network.  Can work as a sort of @uref{https://edstrom.dev/zvjjm/slipbox-workflow#ttqyc, occasional QA routine}.
@end itemize

@item
@samp{org-node-rename-asset-and-rewrite-links}
@itemize
@item
Interactively rename an asset such as an image file and try to update all Org links to them.  Requires @uref{https://github.com/mhayashi1120/Emacs-wgrep, wgrep}.
@itemize
@item
NOTE: It prompts you for a certain root directory@comma{} and then only looks for links in there@comma{} and in sub and sub-subdirectories and so on -- but won't find a link elsewhere.

Like if you have Org files under /mnt linking to assets in /home@comma{} then those links won't be updated.  Or if you choose ~/org/some-subdir as the root directory@comma{} then links in ~/org/file.org will not update.  So choose ~/org as the root even if you are renaming something in a subdir.
@end itemize
@end itemize
@end itemize

Rarer commands for org-node-backlink-mode:

@itemize
@item
@samp{org-node-backlink-mass-update-drawers}
@item
@samp{org-node-backlink-mass-update-props}
@item
@samp{org-node-backlink-mass-delete-drawers}
@item
@samp{org-node-backlink-mass-delete-props}
@item
@samp{org-node-backlink-fix-buffer}
@end itemize

@node Experimental Node sequences
@section Experimental: Node sequences

Do you already know about "daily-notes"?  Then get started with a keybinding such as:

@lisp
(keymap-set global-map "M-s M-s" #'org-node-seq-dispatch)
@end lisp

and configure @samp{org-node-seq-defs}.  See @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node/wiki/Configuring-node-sequences, wiki} for premade examples.

@menu
* What are node seqs?::
@end menu

@node What are node seqs?
@subsection What are node seqs?

It's easiest to explain node sequences if we use "daily-notes" (aka "dailies") as an example.

Org-roam's idea of a "daily-note" is the same as an @uref{https://github.com/bastibe/org-journal, org-journal} entry: a file/entry where the title is just today's date.

You don't need software for that basic idea@comma{} only to make it extra convenient to navigate them and jump back and forth in the series.

Thus@comma{} fundamentally@comma{} any "journal" or "dailies" software are just operating on a sorted series to navigate through.  A node sequence.  You could have sequences for@comma{} let's say@comma{} historical events@comma{} Star Trek episodes@comma{} your school curriculum@dots{}

@node Appendix
@chapter Appendix

@menu
* Appendix I Rosetta stone::
* Appendix II How to rollback::
* Appendix III Random tips::
@end menu

@node Appendix I Rosetta stone
@section Appendix I: Rosetta stone

API cheatsheet between org-roam and org-node.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Action
@tab org-roam
@tab org-node
@item Get ID near point
@tab @samp{(org-roam-id-at-point)}
@tab @samp{(org-entry-get-with-inheritance "ID")}
@item Get node at point
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-at-point)}
@tab @samp{(org-node-at-point)}
@item Prompt user to pick a node
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-read)}
@tab @samp{(org-node-read)}
@item Get node by ID
@tab 
@tab @samp{(org-node-by-id ID)}
@item Get list of files
@tab @samp{(org-roam-list-files)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-org-files)}
@item Get nodes in a file
@tab 
@tab @samp{(indexed-entries-in FILES)}
@item Get backlink objects
@tab @samp{(org-roam-backlinks-get NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-id-links-to NODE)}
@item Get reflink objects
@tab @samp{(org-roam-reflinks-get NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-roam-reflinks-to NODE)}
@item Get title
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-title NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-title NODE)}
@item Get title of file where NODE is
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-file-title NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-file-title NODE)}
@item Get title @emph{or} name of file where NODE is
@tab 
@tab @samp{(indexed-file-title-or-basename NODE)}
@item Get full path to file where NODE is
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-file NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-file-name NODE)}
@item Get ID
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-id NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-id NODE)}
@item Get tags
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-tags NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-tags NODE)}
@item Get tags (local only)
@tab 
@tab @samp{(indexed-tags-local NODE)}
@item Get tags (inherited only)
@tab 
@tab @samp{(indexed-tags-inherited NODE)}
@item Get outline level
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-level NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-level NODE)}
@item Get char position
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-point NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-pos NODE)}
@item Get line number
@tab 
@tab @samp{(indexed-lnum NODE)}
@item Get properties
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-properties NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-properties NODE)}
@item Get subtree TODO state
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-todo NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-todo-state NODE)}
@item Get subtree SCHEDULED
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-scheduled NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-scheduled NODE)}
@item Get subtree DEADLINE
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-deadline NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-deadline NODE)}
@item Get subtree priority
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-priority NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-priority NODE)}
@item Get outline-path
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-olp NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-olpath NODE)}
@item Get @samp{ROAM_REFS}
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-refs NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-roam-refs NODE)}
@item Get @samp{ROAM_ALIASES}
@tab @samp{(org-roam-node-aliases NODE)}
@tab @samp{(indexed-property "ROAM_ALIASES" NODE)}
@item Get @samp{ROAM_EXCLUDE}
@tab 
@tab @samp{(indexed-property "ROAM_EXCLUDE" NODE)}
@item Ensure fresh data
@tab @samp{(org-roam-db-sync)}
@tab @samp{(org-node-cache-ensure t t)}
@end multitable

@node Appendix II How to rollback
@section Appendix II: How to rollback

Instructions to downgrade to @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node/tags, an older version}@comma{} let's say 1.6.2.

With @uref{https://github.com/quelpa/quelpa, Quelpa}:
@lisp
(use-package org-node
  :quelpa (org-node :fetcher github :repo "meedstrom/org-node"
                    :branch "v1.6"))
@end lisp

With @uref{https://github.com/slotThe/vc-use-package, vc-use-package} on Emacs 29:
@lisp
(use-package org-node
  :vc (:fetcher github :repo "meedstrom/org-node"
       :branch "v1.6"))
@end lisp

With built-in @samp{:vc} on Emacs 30+ (but note default value of @samp{use-package-vc-prefer-newest} means you never update@comma{} since it is not aware of Git tags):
@lisp
(use-package org-node
  :vc (:url "https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node"
       :branch "v1.6"))
@end lisp

With @uref{https://github.com/progfolio/elpaca, Elpaca} as follows.  Note that recipe changes only take effect after you do @samp{M-x elpaca-delete} and it re-clones -- the idea is that Elpaca users will prefer to do it manually.

@lisp
(use-package org-node
  :ensure (:fetcher github :repo "meedstrom/org-node"
           :branch "v1.6"))
@end lisp

@dots{}Elpaca can also target an exact version tag.  Package manager of the future@comma{} it is:

@lisp
(use-package org-node
  :ensure (:fetcher github :repo "meedstrom/org-node"
           :tag "1.6.2"))
@end lisp

With @uref{https://github.com/radian-software/straight.el, Straight}:

@lisp
(use-package org-node
  :straight (org-node :type git :host github :repo "meedstrom/org-node"
                      :branch "v1.6"))
@end lisp
>>>>>>> 511e0c5 (docs:)

@node Appendix III Random tips
@section Appendix III: Random tips

Org-roam shipped the optional @samp{(require '=org-roam-export)}@comma{} a patch to fix @samp{id:} links in HTML export.

Good news@comma{} upstream fixed the root of the issue in 5e9953fa0!  Update Org to 9.7+@comma{} then set this.

@example
(setq org-html-prefer-user-labels t)
@end example

@bye
